# `rules_pycross` - Python + cross platform

Use your Poetry or PDM or UV lock files with Bazel and enabling cross-platform builds.

### Features:

- A single lock file for all target platforms, thanks to Poetry, PDM and UV
- Builds that happen in build actions, not during WORKSPACE initialization
- Standard Bazel `http_file` rules used for fetching dependencies. `pip` is not a build-time dependency.

> **Notice:** UV is still experimental

See the [examples](examples).

### Why?

The current Bazel [rules](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_python) for working with Python external dependencies
have a couple of issues that make cross-platform usage difficult (see https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_python/issues/260):

- they're based on `pip` and `pip-compile` which do not generate cross-platform lock files. For example, IPython depends
  on `appnope` only on MacOS. Lock files generated by `pip-compile` will differ based on whether they're created on Linux
  or MacOS. The `pip-compile` solution to this problem is to generate lock files for different systems, on different systems.
- They use `pip install` during the `WORKSPACE` phase to fetch and possibly build packages (including native libraries).
  `WORKSPACE` operations lack many of the things that Bazel's build actions provide such as sandboxing and remote execution.

### How?

A `pip install` operation can be roughly broken down into these parts:

1. determine the environment (OS and Python version/implementation)
2. resolve the dependencies of the package to install, some of which may be platform-specific
   (optionally constrained by a pre-compiled lock file)
3. figure out which files to download - either pre-built wheels matching the current platform or sdists to build locally
4. download sdists and wheels
5. build and install sdists; install wheels

`rules_pycross` attempts to deconstruct this operation into its constituent parts and glue them together with Bazel:

1. `pycross_target_environment` is used to specify target environments ahead of time provided with ABI, platform,
   and implementation parameters (similar to pip's `--abi`, `--platform`, and `--implementation` flags). These
   environments are selected using Bazel's own platform/constraint system.
2. `pycross_lock_file` generates a "lock" `.bzl` file from an input `poetry.lock`. This `.bzl` file contains a mix of
   `http_file` repositories and `pycross_*` targets.
3. `pycross_wheel_build` builds `sdist.tar.gz` archives into Python wheels. This is a build action, not a `WORKSPACE`
   operation.
4. `pycross_wheel_library` "installs" (extracts) a Python wheel - either downloaded or built from an sdist - and
   provides it as a `py_library`.

See the [generated docs](docs).

### Gazelle Plugin
`rules_pycross` is compatible with `rules_python_gazelle_plugin`, a plugin for [Gazelle](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel-gazelle)
that generates BUILD files content for `rules_python` rules, but requires additional configuration.

`rules_python_gazelle_plugin` is originally designed for `rules_python` rules that uses custom name normalization, whereas
`rules_pycross` uses the Python [name normalization](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/name-normalization/).

To switch name normalization, use the following Gazelle [directives](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_python/blob/main/gazelle/README.md#directives):
```
# gazelle:python_label_convention :$distribution_name$
# gazelle:python_label_normalization pep503
```

Other than these options, the configuration is identical to a setup with `rules_python`. 
Read more [here](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_python/blob/main/gazelle/README.md#directives).

<details>
  <summary>Example BUILD.bazel</summary>

```
load("@gazelle//:def.bzl", "DEFAULT_LANGUAGES", "gazelle", "gazelle_binary")
load("@pip//:requirements.bzl", "all_whl_requirements")
load("@rules_python_gazelle_plugin//manifest:defs.bzl", "gazelle_python_manifest")
load("@rules_python_gazelle_plugin//modules_mapping:def.bzl", "modules_mapping")

# gazelle:python_root
# gazelle:python_label_convention :$distribution_name$
# gazelle:python_label_normalization pep503
gazelle_binary(
    name = "gazelle_bin",
    languages = DEFAULT_LANGUAGES + [
        "@rules_python_gazelle_plugin//python",
    ],
)

gazelle(
    name = "gazelle.update",
    gazelle = ":gazelle_bin",
)

gazelle(
    name = "gazelle.check",
    args = ["-mode=diff"],
    gazelle = ":gazelle_bin",
)

modules_mapping(
    name = "gazelle.metadata",
    tags = ["manual"],
    wheels = all_whl_requirements,
)

gazelle_python_manifest(
    name = "gazelle.mapping",
    modules_mapping = ":gazelle.metadata",
    pip_repository_name = "pip",
    tags = ["manual"],
)
```

###### Useful Commands
```
> bazel run //:gazelle.update    # Update gazelle_python.yaml used by Gazelle
> bazel run //:gazelle.check     # Show changes needed to build scripts per Gazelle
> bazel run //:gazelle.update    # Apply changes needed to build scripts per Gazelle
```
</details>